The broken mirror
 (2nd Cats Eye)


The old lion handed the cats bag over to the cub and turned to make his exit. There was a deafening silence but for the sound of its still majestic paws. 

Our young cub had by now grown with the experience of all these stories but suddenly there was a little panic in his cats eyes as he called the old lion back.

“Wait! What is the meaning of life... down there in the jungle?”

The other animals that by now had gathered giggled as they had just begun to break up but the lion turned and raised its paw, looked at length at the cub and replied:

“I will answer also that question.”

The lion walked back, once more opened the bag, took out a piece of a mirror and started its final story:

“When I was but a cub like you and lived in another remote hood of the jungle I one day found the broken pieces of a mirror. I could never figure out how it got there in the first place or what shape it had once had. 


I tried to find all the pieces in order to put it all together again but it was all impossible. So I kept the largest piece, namely this, and dug the others down so no one would cut themselves on the sharp edges. 

Then I set about scraping it against a stone until it was all round. I used to play around with it and got more and more thrilled by the fact that I could I could reflect sunlight into places where the sun could never reach; like caves, deep holes and dark spots covered by the dazzling rain forest.


 It became a game and long practice finding the trickiest and most unexpected places I could find. All the way through my childhood and youth I kept the mirror and every now and then I would take it out and resume that challenge.

Then, when I grew up and became an adult I realised that this wasn’t just a child’s game. It was a metaphor or an image of what I could do with my life. I had my own experience, understanding and empathy that could be reflected. 

I was the fragment of a mirror whose original shape I do not know. I understood that I was not the light, nor the source of the light but that I could reflect the light into dark places in the world as well as hidden corners of peoples hearts as well as my own. 

Hence doing so making a little difference, being the change I wanted to see in the world and in other people. And by doing so perhaps others would follow suit becoming copycats in its positive sense.

And this I believe is the meaning of life.”

At this point the old lion paused and put the mirror back in the bag saying:

“Now you don’t need a mirror, do you? - you already have the mirror using your eyes, your cats eyes! Remember?

Use them wisely to find dark places and share your light; one looking in and the other looking out. Enlighten dark unloving spots within yourself and use that same loving light in dark places wherever you’ll find them, down there in the big wild world and there are many dark places in this jungle. 

Be the change you want to see in the world, become an advo-cats and use your CATS-EYES to empower you along your journey. Yes, you may think it strange with a challenge like this but that is what it takes being like me; of a travelling kind. Now once more; I wish you enough!”


And the cub and its friends picked up the bag and the challenge, walked down the mountain and out into the world. And you dear listener, may think it strange with a story ending like this but this is, as you, of a travelling kind.
