CONNECTED TO CATS-EYES BRACELET



These are some written stories and adaptations of inspirational stories found on
the Internet, chosen to match each bead of the bracelet.


By Nik Dee 2014-07-12

How the wild cat got his eyes. (1st Cats Eye)

You may think it strange with a story beginning like this but this is of a travelling kind.

There once was an old and wise lion that had travelled far across the tropic landscape of a jungle and now made its way up the mountains. There it found a river and in the riverbed a pair of precious stones; cats eyes gems. They sparkled and glistened in the sunlight. It picked them up and put them in a special pocket of its bag, a bag in a bag, and wandered on.


Yes, you may think it strange with a lion carrying a bag but this was a travelling kind. Little later it camped for the night and made a small campfire for comfort and company. 


Not far away a little cub, that had lost its way out of the jungle and up the mountains, caught sight of the light and curiously approached the wanderer. It was good to have a light showing the way in the dense darkness of a mountainous tropical forest. At first it got really scared by the fearful look of the mighty lion, sitting in the flickering light of the flames.

But curiosity got the better out of it and it approached the lion asking whether it could accompany for the night and possibly some supper, if by chance there would be any. 

The old lion said yes and opened its bag and picked out a large piece of bread.

Yes, you may think it strange with a lion eating bread and not meat but this was a lion of a travelling kind. But the little cub now rather caught sight of the precious stones sliding out of the bag in the bag. They sparkled and glistened in the moonlight. In jest it said: 

“Wow! could I possibly have them stones instead?”

It had hardly finished the sentence biting its lips already regretting this cocky request by a total little stranger. 


But the lion simply said yes, go ahead, please have my stones.”


The little cub could not believe its luck. It was so stunned that it bid its farewell without tasting even a slightest breadcrumb. Well, I suppose it didn’t dare to stay in case the old lion would suddenly change its mind. The cub took the stones and backed off in respectful gratitude still feeling like enrolled in a test just awaiting any moment when the lion would suddenly change its mind. 

The old lion did not, ate its bread and curled up to sleep. But it didn’t take long until it heard distant approaching paw steps and the cub was back again. It sat down by the smouldering fire, returned the stones and said: 

“Thank you for the kind and generous gift. But there is something else I would rather have than these precious stones, something much more precious. And that is whatever it was that made you willing to give them to me without the slightest doubt or hesitation.“ 

“That you will have.” Said the old lion. “And much more. I will make the precious gems your eyes, glowing in the dark and enabling you finding your way also in the dark. Use them wisely to find dark places and share your light; one looking in and the other looking out. Enlighten dark unloving spots within yourself and use that same loving enlightenment in dark places wherever you’ll find them in this big wild world and there are many dark places down there in this jungle.”

Yes, you may think it strange with a lion with magic powers but this was a travelling kind. So it happened when the wild cat got its eyes and hence made it see in the dark. Flash a light at any cat and you will see the precious gems mirror back.
