The inner voice
 (Quiet gems)

Having magically given the cub its cats eyes the old lion put another piece of wood on the fire and said: 

“In return of your eyes I wish to borrow your ears, to listen and remember my stories. But not only that, I also wish to tune them in. You see, to listen well, is perhaps the greatest tool of all in any relationship. And before you start giving advice there are three good things to say and to keep in mind. They are:


What do you mean? /1 don't understand. & Tell me more.

You may say these three things as many times as you like and you may change the order in which you say these three things.


But I also encourage you to listen with your inner ear and find that eventually silence will speak to you. If you are truly attentive, you may then find out what to do and with whom to do it. 


It's really more of a feeling than a voice - a whispery sensation that pulsates just beneath the surface of your being. We all animals have it. 

But I am not sure about the people of the jungle. I have a feeling that they are the only creatures that deny and ignore it. 


Animals never deliberately cause themselves discomfort the way people do. How many times have I not seen and felt them go against their gut, only to find themselves at odds with the natural flow of things?

The people seem to get caught up in the business of doing, and sometimes lose their place in the flow. But as you well know; the more we can tune in to our intuition, the better off we are. I believe it's how the Great Spirit speaks to us. And I often tell friends: When you don't know what to do, do nothing. 

Get quiet so you can hear the still, small voice - your inner GPS guiding you. 

Trying to understand people I once walked along talking to the almighty jungle spirit.” 


"So, you would like to talk to me?" SPIRIT asked.

"If you have time," I said and SPIRIT smiled.


"My time is eternity... what questions do you have in mind for me?"

"What surprises you the most about humankind in this jungle?" SPIRIT answered...


"That they get bored with childhood, that they rush to grow up and then long to be children again. That they lose their health to make money... and then lose their money to restore their health. 


That by thinking anxiously about the future they forget the present, such as they live in neither the present nor the future. That they live as if they would never die, and die as though they have never lived.“


SPIRIT’s hand took mine... and we were silent for a while. 

And then I asked, 
“What are some of life’s lessons you want your children to learn?” SPIRIT replied:

“To learn they cannot make anyone love them. All they can do is let them be loved. To learn that it is not good to compare themselves to others. To learn to forgive by practicing forgiveness. To learn that it takes a few seconds to pen profound wounds in those they love, and it can take many years to heal them. To learn that a rich person is not the one who has the most, but is one who needs the least. To learn that there are people who love them dearly, but simply do not know how to express or show their feelings. To learn that two people can look at the same thing, and see it differently. To learn that it is not enough that they forgive one another, but they must also forgive themselves.”



Thank you for your time”, I said humbly. “Is there anything else you would like your children to know?” SPIRIT smiled again and said:

Just know that I am here. ALWAYS. Just, every now and then, take some quiet time and listen within.
