Heaven and hell
 (Love-gem)

Our cub now stayed on some time with the old lion who kept sharing its wisdom in the telling of stories. Some of which you are going to get told now as well. In time other young animals also joined and listened.


There was once a samurai hyena warrior who travelled to the distant home of an old monk-ey. On arriving he burst in and bellowed, 


“Monk-ey, tell me! What is the difference between heaven and hell?”

The monk sat still for a moment. Then he turned and looked up at the warrior. 


“You call yourself a samurai warrior,” he smirked. “Why, look at you. You’re nothing but a mere sliver of an animal!”


“Whaaat!!” cried the samurai, as he reached for his sword.

“Oho!” said the monk. “I see you reach for your sword. I doubt you could cut off the head of a fly with that.”

The samurai was so infuriated that he could not hold himself back. He pulled his sword from its sheath and lifted it above his head to strike off the head of the old monk. At this the monk looked up into his seething eyes and said, 

“That, my son, is the gate to hell.” Realizing that the monk had risked his life to teach this lesson, the samurai slowly lowered his sword and put it back into the sheath. He bowed low to the monk in thanks for this teaching.


“My friend,” said the monk, “That is the gate to heaven. 

Now please sit down and I will tell you another story”

“Oh monk-ey, do tell.” said the hyena, unbuckled his sword and sat down in reverence. “A holy rabbi-t was talking with God about Heaven and Hell.

"Come," said God. "Skip along with me, and I will show you Hell."


And together they walked into a room of cold, rough stone. In the centre of the room, atop a low fire, sat a huge pot of quietly simmering vegetable stew. The stew smelled delicious, and made the rabbit’s mouth water. A group of animals sat in a circle around the pot, and each of them held a curiously long-handled spoon. The spoons were long enough to reach the pot; but the handles were so ungainly that every time someone dipped the bowl of their spoon into the pot and tried to manoeuver the bowl to their mouth, the stew would spill. The rabbit could hear the grumblings of their bellies. They were cold, hungry, and miserable.

"And now," God said, "I will show you Heaven."

Together they walked into another room, almost identical to the first. A second pot of stew simmered in the centre; another ring of animals sat around it; each person was outfitted with one of the frustratingly long spoons. But this time, the people sat with the spoons across their laps or laid on the stone beside them. They talked, quietly and cheerfully with one another. They were warm, well-fed, and happy.

"Lord, I don't understand," said the rabbit. "How was the first room Hell; and this, Heaven?"

God smiled. "It's simple," he said. "You see, they have learned to feed each other."

The monk handed the hyena a bowl of fruits and concluded: 

“as in heaven so on earth. We can choose to act out of fear or love and in the latter to give as well as receive.
