Standing up on the inside
 (Star-gem)


A wildcat father once took his cub to a fair. You may think it fair to question a wildcat going to a fair but don’t despair, this story is a different affair; it is of a travelling kind.


At the fair was a bear selling balloons. Some on strings and others more like statues standing on the ground. The bear had all colors, red, blue, yellow, green in different shapes and figures. Whenever business was low the bear would release a helium balloon into the air and when the young ones saw that, they all wanted to buy one. 



The little cub had never seen anything like it and got all excited. In particular there was a balloon- made statue of a cat, not unlike itself, filled with helium. The cub could not stop looking at it. After a while it could neither resist patting it gently with the paw. Carful to keep the claws well kept in and curious to see what happened. The statue leaned back a bit and swayed right up again. This made the cub even more excited and it tried again. 



A bit harder this time. Same ting and the balloon was straight back up at its feet. Now the cub smacked full on with a tight paw and the statue hit the ground and still bounced up standing. At this point the father caught sight of what was happening and he asked: 

“What do think makes it stand up every time it’s knocked over to the ground?”


The cub thought for a while and then replied:

“Maybe cause it’s standing up on the inside.”

Meanwhile the bear was letting another balloon up in the air as if it didn’t care. But then felt someone tugging at its jacket. The bear turned around and saw the little cub who asked: 

“If you release a cat balloon, would that also fly?” Moved by the cubs concern, the bear answered with empathy. 


“Cub, it is not the color or image of the balloon, it is what is on the inside of the balloon that makes it go up. The same thing applies to all of us, to our lives. It is what’s on the inside that counts and the thing inside that makes us go up is; the attitude. 



Have you ever wondered why some individuals, some animals are more successful than others? It is not a secret, you know. These ones simply think differently and then act differently. Taking their lives to new heights, reaching new horizons.


Now, take that elephant over there as an example. It is being kept here at the fair. Do you see the string it is being held by? 


Not much thicker than to my balloons and attached to a wooden peg in the ground. Isn’t it strange that such a huge beautiful, magnificent creature, that can lift several hundred kilos with its trunk, but just stands there making no attempt to walk away? To everyone else it is obvious that it, at any time, so easily could break away from its bonds? 



Now listen carefully and I tell you why.


When it was young and little, iron chains to an iron bar tied it. No matter how hard it pulled it could not break away. The harder it pulled, the more it hurt. So eventually it gave up, having learnt that breaking free is not possible. The grown up elephant therefore doesn’t even try. It is no longer the chain tying the elephant but an inner voice or lesson learned.




So cub! Are you being held back by belies that doesn’t serve you? Or worse been told you can’t make it or that this is not for you? Then break away. Whatever you can conceive and believe, you can achieve! It’s your attitude, not your aptitude, that will determine your altitude! Well sorry junior, that was a little wordy. 



Have a balloon - you’ll have it for free. How high you will fly? Well, the choice is yours. Aim for the stars and listen out for the higher powers to guide you along your way.”
