The Cracked pot
 (Life gem)

“A water bearer at the jungle village had end of a pole which the bearer carried ac a crack in it, and while the other pot was portion of water at the end of the long where they lived, the cracked pot arrived only half full.




For a full two years this went on daily, with the bearer delivering only one and a half pots full of water to his home. Of course, the perfect pot was proud of its accomplishments, perfect to the end for which it was made. But the poor cracked pot was ashamed of its own imperfection, and miserable that it was able to accomplish only half of what it had been made to do.

After two years of what it perceived to be a bitter failure, it spoke to the water bearer one day by the stream.

“I am ashamed of myself, and I want to apologize to you.

“Why?” asked the bearer. “What are you ashamed of?”

“I have been able, for these past two years, to deliver only half my load because this crack in my side causes water to leak out all the way back to you're the village. Because of my flaws, you have to do all of this work, and you don't get full value from your efforts,” the pot said.

The water bearer felt sorry for the old cracked pot, and in his compassion said,

“As we return to the hut, I want you to notice the beautiful flowers along the path.”


 Indeed, as they went up the hill, the old cracked pot took notice of the sun warming the beautiful wild flowers on the side of the path, and this cheered it somewhat. But at the end of the trail, it still felt bad because it had leaked out half its load, and so again it apologized to the bearer for its failure.



The bearer said to the pot, 

“Did you notice that there were flowers only on your side of your path, but not on the other pot's side? That's because I have always known about your flaw, and I took advantage of it. I planted flower seeds on your side of the path, and every day while we walk back from the stream, you’ve watered them. For two years I have been able to pick these beautiful flowers to decorate my home, and not only I but also many others. Without you being just the way you are, we would not have this beauty to grace our place.”


The old lion paused a while, staring out in the distance and then concluded,

“We all have our own shortage and weaknesses. But if we are willing to, we can make advantage of these instead of opposing them. In the eyes of the wise, nothing is wasted. Do not be blocked by your disadvantages. Know your weaknesses and you too can be the water for the better life of all. Know that in you weakness, we find our strengths. 


So don’t underestimate yourself by comparing yourself with others. It's our differences that makes us unique and Beautiful.”
