School of the animals. (Seed-gem)

The old lion leaned back and started on yet another story:

“Once upon a time, all the animals of the jungle decided that they should do something meaningful to meet the problems of the new world, so they organised a school. All the cubs and young ones where to participate. They adopted an activity curriculum of running, climbing, swimming and flying. To make it easier to administer, all of the animals took all of the subjects.”


”You mean they didn’t have to learn to read?” interrupted the cub?

”Nope, and neither to write nor maths.”

 ”Wow - cool!” sighed the young listeners.


"The Mandarin duck was excellent at swimming. In fact, he was better than his instructor. Only the fish could compete. However, the duck made only passing marks in flying and was very poor at running. Therefore, he had to drop his swimming class and do extra running. This caused his webbed feet to become badly worn, meaning that he dropped to an average mark in swimming. Fortunately, “average” was acceptable, therefore nobody worried about it - except the duck who was really disheartened.” 

”What happened to the fish?” asked the cub.


’’Well I don’t think the Piranha was expected at school. Not really part of the animals of the jungle. Perhaps it went swimming on a charter?”

”Yea! or flying with its fins like a flying fish” said another cub who had joined.



”Hmm, Finnair perhaps”, grunted the old one. “But please let me continue.


So, the rabbit started at the top of the class in running, but developed a nervous twitch in his leg muscles because he had so much makeup work to do in swimming. In the end it got so nervous it had to stay at home from school.”


"Poor little bugger” commented the cub.

“Well, neither the squirrel monkey liked water but was excellent in climbing. It could climb with head up or down. However, it encountered constant frustration in flying class because its teacher insisted that it start from the ground up instead of from the treetop down. It developed cramps from overdoing it and ended up with a C in climbing and a D in running.


The eagle was a real problem student and was severely disciplined for being a nonconformist. In climbing class, he beat all of the others to the top, but insisted on using his own way of getting there! It was a true rebel and troublemaker. As a matter of fact the eagle would fly regardless subject on the schedule.




’’Perhaps it joined the fish on the charter?” giggled the cub.

”If it did they probably flew with different companies like Eagleair and Finnair. Otherwise, despite the distinctive bite to it, there would probably been no fish but for the flight menu.

Some that didn’t fly at all were the armadillos. They stayed out of school, and fought the rates because the Governors would not add digging to the curriculum. They apprenticed their children to an immigrated badger and later joined the rabbits and the lemmings to start a successful private school.”



So eventually they had to close down the school since their student just got miserable having to be good at everything rather than nurturing their strengths and proceed from there. We each have our own strengths and need to be working hard to maximise them, not handicap our potential by becoming good at something that isn’t natural for us.



So think about who you are and who the ducks, rabbits, squirrels and eagles are in your life are and how you can best encourage yours and their unique skills and strengths rather than trying to get the same level of average performance out of all of you.»
