Peace of mind
 (Peace gem)

“My great grandfather once ruled this jungle” stated the old lion, not without a great deal of pride. 

“And one day he decided to announce a competition. The artist that best could depict true peace of the jungle would be richly rewarded. 

During the following months all lot of entries got sent to the competition. After a long selective process the lion king had narrowed it down to two pieces. It was two paintings. 

The first one was the stunning image of a mountain by a lake. The high mountains with their snowy peaks made a beautiful contrast against the blue sky. The mountains and the trees all reflected crystal clear on the surface of the lake. My grandfather liked this painting a lot but it was not a given winner.


The other painting was very unlike the first one. It portrayed roaring waterfalls where the water trusted itself down a mountain wall. The sky was covered in dark clouds, giving the impression that a fierce thunderstorm was on its way in. But if you looked close enough you would find a little birds nest on a cliff that shot out in the midst o the waterfall. A bird rested peacefully in it despite the turmoil all around.

In the end the king proclaimed this as the winner of the contest reasoning:

“True peace is not the absence of a storm. True peace is finding inner peace in the midst of it.”
As the story goes on, or rather now the legend. It is said that the bird and its nest was for real.



 The storm that hit turned into a blizzard with heavy snowfall. The nest was safe in between two rocks but the storm heavily snowed a small tree down just beside the nest. 


A little nestling curiously watched the ongoing drama and asked.


“Mom, what is the weight of a snowflake?”

The mother ruffed its feathers a bit and said, “Why, it's nothing. Absolutely nothing at all.”

The nestling sat for a while contemplating this answer.

“Well that interesting,” it said finally. “For I saw the most amazing thing. I was watching the snowfall, each tiny little snowflake, one after another, as it gathered on a branch. 


More and more of these small singular snowflakes gathered, until there was a great mound on the branch. Still more snowflakes gathered, and then I saw the branch break. And you say that snowflakes weigh nothing. “



The mother sat watching the snowflakes without saying anything.

“I wonder”, continued the nestling. “ if that, just like the snowflakes, all we need is just one more voice, and we can finally have world peace.“
