I wish you enough
(Invisible gem)


“On my way up here up in the mountain I had a very special encounter. I overheard the old elephant and his best friend; the little mouse. They were in their last moments together at the albatross airlines as the mouse's departure had been announced. It was time to leave, the little mouse gently stroke the trunk and the old elephant said, 


"I love you and I wish you enough."

The mouse replied, 

"Dearest friend, our life together has been more than enough. Your love is all I ever needed. I wish you enough, too." 


They hugged, as well as a mouse and an elephant can hug, and the mouse climbed the stairs, got seated and the albatross took off. 

The old elephant slowly walked over to the where I sat. Standing there, I could see she wanted and needed to cry. I tried not to intrude on her privacy but she welcomed me in by asking, 

"Did you ever say good-bye to someone knowing it would be forever?" 

"Yes, I have," I replied. "Forgive me for asking but why is this a forever good-bye?"


"I am old and he lives so far away. I have challenges ahead and the reality is the next trip back for him will be for my funeral," she said. “I’m on my way to the elephant kingdom and there he cannot follow.”


“When you were saying good-bye, I heard you say, ‘I wish you enough.’ May I ask what that means?"

She began to smile. 

"That's a wish that has been handed down from other elephant generations. My parents used to say it to everyone." 

She paused a moment and looked up as if trying to remember it in detail and she smiled even more. 

“My memory’s gone really weak and I can’t remember what happened yesterday but those old things I do remember as if yesterday. When we said 'I wish you enough' we were wanting the other person to have a life filled with just enough good things to sustain them". 




Then turning toward me, she shared the following, reciting it from memory, 

"I wish you enough sun to keep your attitude bright.

I wish you enough rain to appreciate the sun more.

I wish you enough happiness to keep your spirit alive.

I wish you enough pain so that the smallest joys in life appear much bigger I wish you enough gain to satisfy your wanting.


I wish you enough loss to appreciate all that you possess.

I wish you enough hellos to get you through the final good-bye."

She then began to cry and walked away and I followed her with my eyes until she was gone out of sight. Somewhere up in the mountain was the bridge, the bridge to elephant kingdom. They say it takes a minute to find a special person. An hour to appreciate them. A day to love them. And an entire life to forget them. So; TAKE TIME TO LIVE ! "

The old lion suddenly stood up and stretched in a somewhat awkward manner. It collected all the little things back into the bag while continuing:

“Now my dear listeners and fellow young storytellers. It is also time for me to leave you. My time has come and my road also leads up these mountains. Yours goes down, back into the jungle and to share these stories that I have now told you. 


Take this bag. I don’t need it any longer. In it you will find all you need to tell your stories, and more as you keep collecting along your journey. It has a cats image on it, make it yours. Yes, you may think it strange with a wild cat carrying a bag but this is of a travelling kind. Now then;


I WISH YOU ENOUGH.
