The Lost Fairy Tales


The Journey Begins


Nik Dee


Illustrations:
Anna-Maria Hillborn
Joakim Hagström


About Swedutainment
A production company based in Sweden but involved with many international projects.
The company works in education and entertainment with theatre, film, broadcast and multimedia.
Our main focus is children, youth and family productions in
“A world of magic and make-believe”.


Mission statement:
To be a creative and artistic driving force that will inspire, influence and engage others in a magic world of make-believe and edutainment.




Nik Dee
Storyteller/writer/actor/singer/director based in Stockholm, Sweden.
Currently youth and arts project manager at Initiatives of change – Sweden.
Nik trained at Guildford School of Acting, London, specializing in musical theatre and holds an MA in Cultural management. He is also Editor in Chief at the European Cultural Parliament.






Contents:
* Foreword 
* About Literary Fairy Tales 
* Pedagogical Ideas 
* The Boy and the Brook
* The Girl who Danced past them all
* Vaste and the Dwarves
* The Wishes
* In the Power of the Mountain Witches
* All the wild Waves of the Sea
* The Art of becoming King


________________


Swedish Literary Fairy Tales - 100 years


Foreword:
The oral Swedish folk tales were first written down and published in book form during the 19th century. Inspired by this, and by other strong influences, there was a movement at the turn of the last century with a monumental increase of fairy tales by authors and illustrators, some of the most famous being Selma Lagerlöf, Elsa Beskow, John Bauer,
Helena Nyblom and Carl Larsson. About 750 literary fairy tales were published over a period of ten years. In comparison, there were about 40 tales written during the corresponding period of time at the turn of the millennium.
Most of these tales are today forgotten and the purpose of this project is to highlight and revive a part of the slumbering treasure of Swedish literary fairy tales, “kunstmärchen”, from its great upswing and days of glory at the turn of the last century.
A selection of these tales has been dug out and edited from the deep realms of the Swedish Royal Library in order to be presented in the form of musical fairy tales; vocal dramatizations with a backdrop of musical scenography and illustrative sound effects.


The theme of this first CD-production and textbook is "Leaving home- conquering the world". There is a clear connection here to the great emigration to America. Hence an English version so that this selection also will be available for Swedes
abroad and Swedish descendants. 
The English version can also be used for educational
matters in Swedish as a second language or learning English, (see Pedagogical
Ideas).


The text has been translated into Tigrinya, Dari, Somali and Arabic for the benefit of new immigrants in Sweden as a tool of getting to know Swedish language and cultural heritage from a time when Swedish people emigrated. 


Thanks to:
• Eva Nordlinder's and your doctoral thesis "The Kunstmärchen in Turn-of-the-Century
Sweden: Helena Nyblom and her tales"
• The Swedish Royal Library in Stockholm
• All those wonderful people who in different ways helped in completing this production.


Nik Dee, Sigtuna, Sweden, in June 2018


________________


About Literary Fairy Tale


By Eva Nordlinder
Resource: Sekelskiftets svenska konstsaga och sagodiktaren Helena Nyblom, Doctoral Thesis, Uppsala University 1991


“Kunstmärchen” – a literary folk-tale, one which is written down in contrast to one which belongs to the oral tradition. During the 1890’s the currents of national romanticism led to a heightened interest in folk-tales, in fact this period could be described as the heyday of legend and myth. Simultaneously there were social and democratic initiatives aimed at
improving child literacy and appreciation of the arts. “Kunstmärchen”, a German term, became an increasingly important genre in Sweden both as children’s literature and as a form of expression for women writers. The interest in folklore and folkverse led to a re-evaluation of the old folktale. Literary interest focussed on newly written folktales
“Kunstmärchen”, perhaps because the authors themselves wished to influence the content. Various literary movements were woven together in the new folk-tale trend and many established authors began to write “Kunstmärchen”. This new form became a literary reserve for women who in the seemingly innocent genre of children’s literature
could develop and express personal thoughts around contemporary issues and problems.
The publication of “Kunstmärchan” increased significantly during the 1890’s, principally in the many Christmas publications intended for children, a publishing sector, which at the same time began to expand. A romantic interest for the innocent child ran parallel to the social and democratic desires for improving general education and providing the best
possible home environments for growing children. Thus the new folk-tale made a reality of that which could be seen as good Swedish children’s literature.




Furthermore, the elementary school teachers at this time became an influential group, both as authors and disseminators of the new folk-tale through periodical publications. In the aforementioned Christmas magazines and even calendars could be found the work of the country’s leading authors. Coincidentally, the majority of these attractive Christmas magazines were issued by publishers owned by elementary school organisations, and
teachers on a nationwide scale helped with the distribution. As a result, a network of literary agents was spread throughout the land. For a reasonable sum the children’s appetite for reading could be satisfied with a nourishing literary diet. “Kunstmärchen” describes a newly written literary folk-tale created by a known author. The form and
content follows the tradition of folk-tale, myth, legend or fantasy, but differs in a number of ways including formal character and style. Flashbacks, explanation and parallel plots were new features compared with the traditional folk-tale. In contrast to the old folk-tale, where components are present through logical necessity, “Kunstmärchen” with its
new elements and approach, could borrow freely from the old tradition if only to create a conventional folklore atmosphere in the story. The diction of “Kunstmärchen” can be both romantic and poetic or, as is sometimes the case, stilted and even dull. “Kunstmärchen” authors relate the protagonist’s thoughts and feelings in a subjective way, which does not occur in the traditional folktale. In “Kunstmärchen” of the period, examples can be
found of anything from finger wagging morality to the deepest symbolism, with stories
embodying an educationally nurturing and moral lesson. As the genre with its characteristic features continued to grow in popularity, so to did the opportunity for female “Kunstmärchen” authors to use it as a vehicle for further exploring and expressing individual and even subversive ideas in a symbolic form.


________________


Pedagogical Ideas


Listening Comprehension
Listen to the stories, ask questions and talk about the contents. Change language and listen again.


Translation
Fold the pages in this textbook, only one language should be visible. Translate a passage of a story. Compare your translation /spelling with the book.


History / Social Studies
Use these stories when you work with emigration, immigration and refugee issues or how creative writing can be used to influence public opinion.
Above all, use in connection with coursework on the great emigration to America.


Literature / Language
Analyze the fairy tales and reflect on why they were written. Make interviews with the leading characters or rewrite the stories to other genres i.e. newspaper article, press item and account of a journey.


Drama
Use this textbook as a script and make a short play. You could also act using the CD as narrative. Change language and perform again.


Radio
Make recordings and create your own sound effects. Reflect on when and where the stories take place and how that affects your recording. Can you record them in yet another language?


Art / Film / Photo
Make short films or slideshows of the stories. Create your own soundeffects or use the CD.


Creative Writing
Let yourself be inspired by these stories and write your own. If you need a theme you could use “To conquer the World”. Reflect on the message of your story.
________________


All the wild waves of the sea


(By Helena Nyblom, published in ”Once Upon a Time” 1897)


Once upon a time there was a poor widow who lived with her two children, Fridolf and Violanta, in a small house high upon a mountain. The house lay between great trees, but in front of it was an open place from which you could see far and wide, beyond fields and meadows, forests and hills and valleys. And furthest away of all there was a deep blue streak, and that was the sea.
When the wind blew up there on ridge you could see how the dark line on the horizon grew darker and darker and until the blue was so deep and threatening that it was almost black.  
"What is that black thing so far away?" Violanta asked her mother.
"Those are the wild waves of the sea," her mother answered her.
On the top of the hill where the house lay a fresh spring spouted forth, and it soon grew to a brook that dashed down over the stones, twining between thickets and shrubs, seeking its way down to the valley.
One spring day Violanta went to wash in the brook. The water rushed to throw itself down the falls. It looked as if all the waves were in such a hurry to get down the mountain and over the plains. Violanta laid still and looked at the white, frothing water and then she asked:
"Where are you hurrying to, you babbling brook?"
"To the wild waves of the sea! To the wild waves of the sea!" the brook called loudly and stormed on.
Violanta stood up slowly and fixed her gaze upon the wide landscape stretched out underneath her.
"The wild waves of the sea! The wild waves of the sea!" Violanta said slowly. "I also long to go to them."
"You are not leaving mother and me and our dear little home, are you?" Fridolf laughed, as he had happened to overhear her.
Violanta did not answer him, but Fridolf could tell that something occupied her thoughts.
One morning when the mother and Fridolf woke up, Violanta was gone, and they wept, because they felt it in their hearts that they would never see her again.
Violanta had woken up early, snuck out to pull on her shoes, and then she had started to run. She followed the leaping brook from one rocky ledge to the next until she reached the valley.
"I will follow it," she thought. "I will follow it where it runs, and so I should reach the wild waves of the sea at last."
The brook grew to be a river and reached a great gleaming lake, and on the opposite side of the lake the river emerged and flowed forth again, stronger and livelier than before, as if it had gathered new strengths in the waters of the lake. And just there stood a watermill. 
When the miller caught sight of the girl who came running he called out to her:
"Where are you going to, little girl, so early in the morning?"
"To the wild waves of the sea," Violanta answered, and wanted to keep on running.
"Ah, wait a little here," the miller called. "Wait a little and calm yourself here with us. If you want to enter my service you shall have all the food and drink you want. Here at the mill we have a good time, don't you know, with both work and dancing."
Violanta stood for a moment in thought. She was fairly tired from the long way she had already run. And thus it happened that she came to serve at the miller's. 
Violanta was a good girl, and strong, and set her heart and mind to any work she was given to do. She soon became much liked by masters and servants alike. And she was as light in the dance as she was swift at work. The miller's boy had to keep pulling out his fiddle, but while he played his eyes followed Violanta, and once when she passed him, he sent a kind word with her. 
One evening the miller's boy came and asked to speak with Violanta. He asked her so prettily and humbly if she could not like him a little – preferably a lot – and be his wife.
Violanta thought that such friendship was not easily spurned. He could work like few others, play like nobody else, and he had a heart that you could trust. But she still did not know exactly what she wanted.
Early next morning, when the sun had not risen yet, Violanta went down to the river. She leaned so far over the waves that the spray hit her face.
"Where are you hurrying to?" she whispered.
"To the wild waves of the sea! To the wild waves of the sea!" the river answered, and rushed on.
"Oh, yes," Violanta exclaimed loudly and spread her arms. "The wild waves of the sea! I shall follow them there."
And she started running with all her might, following the narrow path through the pastures along the river.
The miller's boy looked for her all day, but when the sun set he wept and thought: 
"She will never come again!" And she never did. 
When the river and Violanta reached the other side of the hills a wonderful place lay before them. The meadows were full of fragrant flowers and spread wide below oaks and linden trees, and in the middle of the most beautiful meadow there was a great big house in a garden. Now Violanta noticed a woman reclining with a book in an armchair in the shade of a chestnut tree. She laid so still that Violanta first thought her asleep, but then she looked up all of a sudden. She regarded Violanta with wide, thoughtful eyes. 
"Come closer," she said in a mild voice, and reached out her hand. "Where are you running to in the summer's heat?" she asked.
Violanta stopped, hot and out of breath.
"To the wild waves of the sea", she answered slowly.
"I see," said the fair lady, and smiled. "So many pass that way, but they rarely return. Stay here with me, Penserosa, instead. I could need you, and this is a good place to be - the longer you stay with me, the more pleasing you will find it to be.
Then Violanta asked in which way she could be of help, because she thought it seemed like a marvellous place to be.
"Well, you see," the lady answered, "I cannot walk, and so I always have to stay still. But you, girl," she went on, "you who are young and healthy, you can climb the high places where I can't go, and reach the deep forests where I have never been, and you shall bring me the most hidden flowers and the lightest butterflies, and find me stones and crystals from the mountains, and then I shall tell you the most wonderful things about them."
Violanta listened to the fair lady's words. Her voice was so mild and her eyes were shining, and around her resting place the violent smelled so lovely. 
"Yes," said Violanta, "I want to stay here with you. This is a good place to be." 
And thus Violanta came to serve the fair Penserosa, and it was as she had said. The longer Violanta lived there, the better she liked it.
The entire summer passed like a single long sunny day, and one evening an icy breeze whisked across the river and twirled the first fallen chestnut leaves away.
"Alas," Penserosa said with a sigh, "that was winter's first greeting. Now it will soon chase us away from here, but you, Violanta, you shall stay with me forever, won't you? Do you promise that?"
"Forever, that is a difficult word!" Violanta answered. "I do not promise anything."
"Then you do the right thing," her mistress answered her, and looked serious. "Because you would not be able to hold to it."
"Why do you think I could not keep my word?" Violanta asked.
"I see it in your eyes," Penserosa answered and looked deep into the eyes. "In them I see all the wild waves of the sea."
"Oh, yes," Violanta sighed slowly. "The wild waves of the sea! They are still the ones that I long to! If I could only get to see them! I want to see them – all the wild waves of the sea!"
The next morning a storm awoke Violanta.
"The wild waves of the sea!" sighed through the forest.
"The wild waves of the sea!" roared in the river.
She hurried to dress, and ran outside and whirled across the plains and into the forest. Bushes ripped her dress, she tripped over stones and bumped into trees, but she stormed on with undiminished speed. From the forest she came out on the open moor where neither trees nor bushes grew, and there it went twice as fast.
The storm carried her onwards like thistledown, closer and closer to the sea. Her feet hardly touched the ground; she could no longer breathe, but flew as if stunned over the heathery moor towards the sandy expanse by the sea.
Suddenly a violent gust of wind knocked her down, and she fell unconscious by a sand ridge. When she awoke she saw the deep blue sky overhead, but nothing else. At first she did not understand where she was. Everything around her was deserted, but she stood up and kept walking in the sand. She saw something shining blue behind the ridges. It was the sea.
The billowing waves rose and craned their necks.
"Those are the wild waves of the sea!" Violanta said slowly as she approached the beach. With a violent boom they broke on the shore.
"Oh, oh no!" Violanta whispered. "They are terrible, the wild waves of the sea."
But the sea rose higher and higher. The billowing swells gathered together and rose, springing forth like tigers, roaring like wild lions, howling like evil spirits, -roaring, booming, rolling forth, as if they wanted to engulf the very earth.
Then Violanta raised her arms toward the sky in fear. 
"The wild waves of the sea!" she cried. "The wild waves of the sea! Where shall I flee?"
She turned around to escape, but the sea was already after her. The closest waves snared her feet so that she fell. They almost pulled her under. The ones that followed those, they closed over her. She only let out a piercing cry, and then she vanished into the deep. And now the waves leapt and danced over her, tore and pulled at her, smashed and crushed her, laughed and sang, screamed and wailed:
"Do you feel us now? Do you feel us now? All the wild waves of the sea!" 




________________


The art of becoming king
(by Eva Wahlén, published in "Lekkamraten" 1897)


There once was an old king, very old and wise and mighty and rich, and was therefore also very well liked by his people. The old man had a son too, by the name of Champion, a beautiful, handsome, seventeen year-old prince, fit and strong as an eagle. One day he went in to see his sire. 
"Father", he said, "I think that it is getting time for me to become king as well."
"Well said, my son," The old king answered. "That is just what I have been waiting for. But what about your kingdom? Where is it?"
"My kingdom! You will have to give it to me. Let me have a part of your country. It is large enough for us both."
Then the old man smiled and stroked his beard.
"No, my boy," he said "I got my kingdom by myself. You do as I did. Son, you want to become a king, and to do so you must have a realm to rule. But I say: first, become a king! If you become a king, you will get people, and if you get people you are sure to get a country!"
Champion looked questioningly at the king.
"Any and all of your subjects who come here and ask you for aid, you help," he said, annoyed, "but will not help me."
"Oh, yes," said the king, "with advice. Go out into the world, and in everything you do, strive to become the first, the best. Then you will be a king."
"Well, good bye then, dear father," Champion said. "When I become king you will hear from me." And with that, he left.


But before he went away he had a final parting visit to make. Outside of the town, high upon a hill that reached halfway to the sky, there was a little cabin, and in that cabin wise mother Trina lived. She was Champion's godmother since that his own mother had passed away. She was reputed to be able use magic, and many were those who sought her aid when everything else failed.
"Good evening, little mother!" Champion called from a distance. They were dear friends. 
Mother Trina nodded.
"So you will be on your way now," she said.
"Yes," Champion answered, not surprised that she knew what he had only told his father. "I have come to bid you farewell."
"I have waited for you, my sweet child, and I have a gift for you to take with you on your journey." She hung a small bag made of snakeskin around his neck.
"If you cannot persuade yourself or others to do what you want, this will be of help to you," she said. "They are little goodwillgrains. And no matter how much you take out of the bag, it will always soon be full again."
Champion thanked her and said his farewells.
"When I become king you will hear from me," he said, and with that he went out into the wide world.


On the third day of his journey the flowering meadows, the healthy forests and the billowing cornfields he had been passing through came to an end, and whenever he went he only saw ugly pastures, shabby, overgrown forests, untilled fields and ramshackle cottages. 
"This is where I'll stay", Champion thought, pleased, and then he lay down to sleep in the dewy grass. The next day he went into one of the cottages and asked who owned the land. Maybe he could earn a piece of it by working for it, he wondered.
"Take it you, as much as is mine. I can't even be bothered to look at it," said the peasant who was still in bed, even though it was late morning. 
"Are you sick", Champion asked, "since you are still abed?"
"Nah," the peasant answered, "but why should I get up when I have my nice, comfy bed to lie in?" 
"Oh, you're just lazy!" Champion said, and with that he left.
It was the same in the next cottage, and in all the others too for that matter. When Champion had thus gotten land, he started working. He dug up rocks and hauled them away, fertilized and sowed, cleared land and built roads. It was hard work, and sometimes he almost lost heart. Once it really did fail him. And on top of it all he noticed that he'd also lost mother Trina's goodwill bag. Then he suddenly heard light footsteps in the grass, and soon thereafter he felt a small hand tap his head.
"Did you lose this?" a clear voice said, and when he looked up he saw a girl with lively, happy eyes. In her hand she held mother Trina's bag. To Champion it seemed as if a wave of joy had overwhelmed him, and he put both hands on the girl's face and kissed her right on the mouth. 
"Yes, and you have my thanks for it," he said. "What is your name?"
"Siska," she answered. "But now I don't have time for you anymore. I have to be gone." And she was gone, like a little bird.
Now the axe and the shovel as well as the pick had to do their duty again, and when some time passed, the whole place seemed transformed. Now he too had flowering meadows, fair forests and billowing cornfields. 
During the time that he had been working, the peasants had often taunted him at first, at those times when they had crawled to the door to bask in the sunshine. But now envy was beginning to shine in their eyes.
"Follow my example," Champion said when he saw their looks.
But the farmers were clumsy and stiff after all that laying about, and kept looking morose. So Champion threw a few handfuls of grains from his snakeskin bag at them, and lo and behold! At once all the stiffness was gone from their limbs, and soon their land was as beautiful as Champion's, and he was their beloved friend in all things. But he was the first and foremost of them all, in wisdom as in diligence. 


The word of the new, beautiful realm soon spread to other countries. Idlers and tramps made their way there, and when they saw all the wealth and prosperity that was to be found there, they became bitter and mean. Especially so when they saw the splendid house that Champion had built himself. So busy were the men making their evil plans that they did not at all notice little Siska, who sat hidden and tried to listen to their plans. The men left with their sights set on Champion's farm. Siska crept out of her hiding place and followed them. She did not know for certain what they were about to do, but she felt certain that it was something mean. When they approached the farm she took a shortcut to make it there before them and warn Champion.
"Beware! Beware!" she called. "Evil men want to do you harm!"
Champion caught sight of a small group of men who approached on the road. As it were a couple of them diverged from the others, going a different way. The others continued on their way, and reached Champion who had come to greet them.
"Watch it, now you'll get what you deserve, you grabber!" one of the men screamed and raised his arm. In his hand he held a bow, which he aimed at Champion. But in that moment a glimpse of something light and nimble was seen on the road, and in the next instant the bow fell out of the archer's hand. It was Siska, who had leapt out of the ditch where she had lain hidden just in time. Quick as lightning she picked the weapon up and turned it on its very owner. 
In that same instant a mighty bang was heard, followed by a terrible crackling. When Champion turned around there were flames licking high against the sky, and soon not a trace could be seen of his beautiful farm. Some of the jealous men had slunk around the house and blown it up.
"What despicable people!" Siska exclaimed with tears in her eyes.
"It does not matter to me," Champion said. "I will build a new one, if only you would stay here with me."
Oh, yes, she would love to! And she happily put her little hand in his.
Meanwhile people from the area had flocked there and arranged a posse to find the evil men, and it did not take long before they were all captured.
"Hang them! Hang them!" the mob cried. And many hands were soon willing to hoist the miscreants up the nearest tree. But Champion interfered.
"No, not like that," he said. "Maybe ill fortune and poverty has made them malicious. Let me treat them my way."
And he spoke fair, kind words to them, and gave them food and drink and promises of work, and finally a couple of handfuls of grains from mother Trina's bag. Now it was either the words, the food or the grains, but at once the evil men turned into remorseful, penitent people who humbly and honestly asked Champion to forgive them. Behind him he could hear the cheering and rejoicing from the people who acknowledged him.
"Hail to thee! You brave, wise, diligent and noble man of honour! You shall be our king, you and none other – you are the best of us all, the first in all things."
But a king must also have a castle. And so they immediately set to building one. It was a splendid castle of whitest marble with uncountable chambers, pillars and roofs of glittering silver. And from the east and the west people came travelling, wishing to be Champion's subjects, and that he would rule over them and their land. And in this way he got a kingdom, so mighty and so big that there was none other like it.
But still Champion felt the very happiest when he stood with his queen Siska by the hand on his coronation day, surrounded by all his court on the castle steps, dressed in a crown and a cloak, to receive his old father and the dear mother Trina, who he had sent for in a golden chariot pulled by eight coal black horses. 
He remembered his father's words: "First, become a king! If you become a king, you will get people, and if you get people you are sure to get a country."
Yes, he had been right, and now he was king – by his own power and the goodwillgrains that mother Trina had given him. And he had people and a country too, and he had also gotten the sweetest little queen in the world. Was there anyone anywhere to be found who was as happy as he?


________________


The boy and the brook
(by Cyrus Granér published in "Julklockan" 1898)


You who still play and dream, come and listen to my tale. I heard it one summer's evening by the beach, when the sun had just set and twilight was falling. Who told it? Was it the wave or maybe the wind, or was it the seashell that rested by my foot? That I do not know, but I do know that it wanted to teach me something, and now teach you. So listen to that which was told to me when I sat by the old seamark far out on the point.


The brook, a young and lively little brook, was babbling forth through the pine forest. He  skipped merrily between tufts of grass and stones, never letting himself rest even for a moment. The birch trees wanted to reflect their white trunks in its clear surface, but the brook just teased them by breaking the mirror surface time and time again, so that the birches' images swam back and forth like white swans. The rocks that wanted to enjoy the glorious sunshine were thwarted by the brook, which washed wave after wave over them, laughing when the young sunbeams were broken by its wet embrace. 


He was in his very finest mood because his dearest dream was about to come true – he was drawing near to the sea. The sea he already dreamed of when he had been but a tiny spring that trickled through the deep and dark forest; yes, he longed to the sea, to the vast and boundless sea. There he would grow powerful and rich, and there he would be free – free, and not confined by the narrow borders that existed here. There he would be able to storm and rage, there he would wrestle wind and waves and win – win – and be carried in triumph over the wide and boundless…


The boy, a young, vigorous child sat there on the tussock where the birches' roots have found their purchase. In dizzy joy he had been running around through the flowers of the field trying to catch gold-glimmering butterflies, tumbled and rolled through grass and leaves. Now he sat there with his rosy cheeks coloured by sun and play, and cooled his naked feet in the clear water of the brook. 


"Come, boy, come," the brook gushed, "come follow into the world, come follow to the sea, the proud and rich."
The boy did not answer. He splashed his snowy white feet so that the droplets flew high up in the air, reflected in the sun and fell like a golden rain over the images of the birches that quivered from the swells. 


"Come boy, come," the brook beckoned. "I want to build you a boat of reed and decorate it with water lilies; I want to rock you away from this narrow world, I want to share my happiness with you, my joy, my victory. In the sea there is a most beautiful island with the fairest castle of crystal. I will give it to you – come!"


The boy still said nothing, but thought about the cabin at home, how small and narrow it was.


"Come, boy, I will give you freedom. We will play all through the days in halls of purple, free and happy you will enjoy the most wonderful of lives."

The boy's thoughts flew homewards again, he remembered the old ones' bent backs, he knew how heavy and hard the work was.


"Come, boy, come – come, you shall get gold, pretty glimmering gold."


The boy thought about the bread, how little there was, how hard and dry it was.


"Come, come!"


Suddenly a boat could be seen, slender and fine.

"Come, it shall carry you over waters gleaming in the sun."


The sun shone so enthralling on the waves; freedom, happiness and glory waited around the next bend, and the brook beckoned - beckoned.


The boy listened – only one step, and all would be his…


Then a small bird sang in the far away in the distance. Warmly and faintly the song was heard out from the dark pine forest:


“A little nest that in our forest rest
  Is sweetest home, where safe is best”


"Come," the brook tempted, "the fairest songs shall caress your ear, yes everything you will gain, everything attain."


But the bird sang on:


“Out in the world, along your way
  Lies hidden traps to lead you astray.”




The boy arose.
"Come, boy, come," the brook whispered in its sweetest voice. But the boy was gone, he ran away – home to his mother's safe embrace.


The boy stood on the shore of the wide sea. He wanted to know what had happened to the brook that had left to find happiness. He asked the cliff by his foot, but the cliff knew nothing; he asked the seagull that bathed in the waves, but it knew nothing; he turned to the seaweed that had washed ashore, but there he received no answer to his question either. Then a large wave rolled in on land, and it knew what had happened to the forest brook. 


"Boy," it said, "you wish to know what life had to offer the brook that once surged over your foot. It is a sad tale. He stormed out into the sea, reckless, proud and bold. Defiant he demanded that everything and everyone obey him, but the sea was too strong and powerful for him. It broke his might; it ripped him apart and threw him a droplet here, a droplet there. It held no happiness, no peace, it only offered him trouble and storm, and soon the brook was gone; whipped, shredded, destitute and forgotten he perished in the surging, wild throng."


The boy shivered. How close had it not been that he had met the same fate? He soon found his feet – and ran home. The cabin was still as narrow, the bread as hard, but so calm and sweet it was there in contrast to the world outside, the wild, ravaged, swarming world.


________________


The girl who danced past them all
(By Helena Nyblom, published in "Det var en gång II")


When the sun shone on the avenue lined by a row of great tall trees, it was like a huge, brilliant festival. And then all the peacocks went to stand in a ring and unfurled their striking tail feathers. They shone in the sun like a dazzling wheel of green, blue and gold, and they made as if a wreath of fans around the girl. The pheasants stretched their necks and let their yellow tails rest in the grass while she danced.
"It is royal! It is noble!" they said. "That girl is obviously of a princely family."
Yes, the girl was very happy with all of her birds, and she lived together with them for a whole year, and danced for them.
However she scarcely talked with the people on the farm. They saw her as a terribly simple thing, since she was only a  "hen-lass", as they called her, and she did not seek their company either. 
But so it happened, that the gentleman of the farm, who was a rich man and a good master to his people, wanted to throw them a great dance feast. The hengirl was invited of course, along with everyone else, and it was not without that the people of the farm were learning that she knew how to dance, and longed to see her, but they did not tell her this.
She herself was very happy.
"A dance feast," she thought. "A feast, where everyone can dance! Imagine how beautiful! And how many dances I shall learn."
And thus she went to the barn where the dance was to be held.
On a barrel two fiddlers were sitting, playing the violin. It sounded mostly like when two cats are pulling each end of a sheep's gut.  To this music everyone was dancing on the floor. The strange thing was that not a single one of them looked happy. They were jostling and shoving and moving their legs over the floor as fast as they could manage.
"This is a dance feast?" the girl thought, and stayed by the door. She sighed deeply, and there were tears in her eyes; she was so bitterly disappointed.
But then a big, sweaty man came over to her, and he reached out his hand and wanted to dance with her.
"No, no!" she answered, "I don't dance."
"What kind of talk is that," the farmhand said, "they say that if there is anything you know, it is how to dance."
"Yes, alone – alone", the girl answered slowly.
All around the barn there was laughter and grinning, and the farmhand continued:
"Listen to her, who wanted to dance alone! Nobody must touch her! Forward, boys! Someone should be able to catch her!"
Three, four of the best dancers leapt across the floor to grab her. But in that moment, she was out through the door and down on the road. She ran, she flew, she danced, because she never moved forward so fast as when she was dancing, and now she wanted to get away.
The next morning by sunrise, the girl came to the sea, and there by the ocean was the king's castle. When the sun had risen a bit higher up in the sky and there was movement inside, the girl went to the castle gate and knocked. The castle's seneschal himself came to open, and asked the girl what she could want in the royal castle so early in the morning.
Well, the girl said, she would so dearly like to get a position, no matter how insignificant and humble, at the royal castle.
The seneschal looked carefully at her and then he asked her if she thought that she could do, helping the gardener with the flowers in the garden. The girl, who was well acquainted with flowers, so became a gardener's girl in the king's garden, and it was so beautiful that the garden of paradise itself could hardly have been more beautiful.
Soon the girl learned to work with the flowers in the way the gardener wanted it. She was up early and went asleep late, and she soon knew how all the flowers should be cared for. One thing especially made her glad. She had never found a place before where you could dance as well as in this garden. Up on the terrace in the glowing moonshine she danced the "star dance", and in the early morning, before anyone else had risen, she danced the solemn "light dance" with a white lily in her hand. In the middle of the day when everyone else was resting, she danced the "sun dance" among all the roses. It was the dance of joy and summer, with high happy leaps and wide gestures.
Nobody lived in the castle, since the queen was dead and the king had just gone on a journey with his sun, the young prince. The castle seneschal was awaiting them back at any time, but he did not know which day they would arrive.
So it happened, that they arrived home unannounced late one night, and the girl who lived in the garden house and lay asleep did not know that the royal family had returned home.
She awoke early and went out to the terrace to await the sun's arrival. When the sun rose, shining and burning over the horizon, the girl danced the grave and jubilant "light dance" and spread her arms towards the sun.
She thought that no one saw her, but up in the tower room there lived the young prince who had also woken early, joyful to be home again. He stood and watched the sunrise. When he caught sight of the girl, he thought that he had never in his life seen anything more beautiful, but soon after the sun had risen, she vanished.
The prince asked both the seneschal, the gardener and the whole staff who were once again in the castle if any of them could tell him who had danced in the sunrise, but none could, because nobody knew that the girl could dance. He almost thought that he had dreamed it all.
But one moonlit night, when he was out strolling on the wall above the crashing waves of the sea, the moon's glow lit upon an open place among the trees. And there! Yes, there she came again, the strange girl. She stood for a moment and looked out over the play of the ocean waves, and then she started dancing the "billow dance". When she was still again, the prince rushed to go over up to her, but at the sound of his footsteps she danced away and vanished like a shadow among shadows in the park.
The next day the prince sought after the girl everywhere, but he no longer spoke to anyone about it. Time passed, and the prince kept looking, but found no girl.
Then it happened one very hot afternoon that the prince had lain down in the shade of a linden tree to sleep. He thought there was a rustling close by, and he turned to lie on his stomach and peered in through the bushes in the rose garden that lay right there in the middle of the park. And there, in the middle of the dazzling sunlight, yes there he found the girl dancing the "sunshine dance". The prince quickly leapt to his feet, and before the girl could escape he was by her side and gripped her wrist.
"Who are you, strange girl, who dance like no one else on this earth?" he asked her.
The girl turned as red as the roses she was sitting amongst and asked the prince not to be cross with her.
"I can't help it," she said. "I am born with it."
But then the prince smiled and said, that there was nothing he wished for more in this world than to see her dance.
"From hereafter you shall only dance for me," he said. And so it was.
They met in the sunshine and in the shade, by daylight and moonshine, and the prince sat very still and just watched her dance. He was only happy in those moments when he was where the girl was. Everything else he found boring and stupid.
And so finally he went to his royal father and told him, that if he wanted his well, he had to give him the girl from the garden to be his wife, because without her he could not live at all.
Then the king wanted to meet the girl, and when she came, she was so radiantly beautiful that it was as if a ray of sunshine had fallen in the king's heart. 
"Girl," he said, "my son, the prince, has come to hold you so dear that he says he cannot possibly live without having you as his wife. As he is my only child, and the apple of my eye, I will have to give in to him, although it costs me – immeasurably! There is but one little condition that I attach to my agreement, that you will promise to abide by, and you must never break that promise. I have been told that you dearly love to dance, strange dances between earth and heaven. There might not be anything evil in that, but it is not suitable for one who is married to a prince. So, this one thing you must promise us, to never again dance your dances from the moment you become my son's bride."
The king fell silent, and watched the girl. But she had turned all pale, and looked at the prince.
"What is the meaning of this? I cannot dance anymore?"
"My royal father wishes it to be thus," the prince said and lowered his eyes.
"But if I can't dance," the girl said, "then I won't be myself anymore, and then you will not be marrying me, but someone else."
"You are the most beautiful and the best of them all," the prince whispered, "and I love you."
"You don't know me," said the girl, and her eyes had turned so cold. "My lord and king," she continued, and curtsied for the throne, "you have honoured me highly by wanting to make me your son's wife, but the condition that you demand, I can never fulfil, because never, never will I cease to dance for as long as I live."
And she straightened up and left the throne. First she walked slowly, then she glided on one foot, and then she danced. She lifted her arms above her head and danced out of the hall, down the stairs and out through the park, under the starry sky. 
Never, never had she been able to dance as she did now! Finally she did not touch the ground, she flew as if carried by wings. When the sun rose she danced out over the ocean. It went as smoothly on the waves as it did in the flowering fields. 
She felt that now she was free, now she knew that nobody would catch her, and that she would be allowed to dance all her life.
By the beach there were two little naked boys in a boat, catching small crabs. They looked up and saw how the girl floated past them like a vision in the morning light.
"Did you see that," one of them said to the other. "She could dance!"


________________


In the power of the mountain witches
(by Anna Egman published in "Folkskolans Barntidning" 1905)


So now at fifteen years of age he found himself alone in life, Elias – coal-stack Lars' Elias, as he was sometimes known. In his breast pocket he had his mother's worn purse with a few coins in it, and a small Bible. With his mother's blessings and her last words on her deathbed in his mind: "Never forget to pray to God, my child," he started his journey.
It was a lovely summer's day when he left from his old, poor home to set out into the world to seek to make a living and find and his fortune. When he had walked for a little while, he met an old woman who asked for a coin.
"I can earn new coins, being young and strong," Elias thought, and shared the contents of the old purse with the crone.
"Thank you", the old woman said and picked a few wilted leaves from the ground. "I have nothing but these to give you in stead, but hide them away anyway, and one day they will come in handy."
That was a strange gift, Elias thought, but he put the leaves in the purse anyway, and then he kept walking down the path dreaming bright dreams of the future. 
Then it happened that he found himself standing before a high mountain wall.
"How am I going to make it over or around this one?" he said aloud to himself, and at that same moment a beautiful woman put herself in his way.
"I shall clear the way for you," she said, "if you follow me."
In a moment the mountain wall opened, and Elias saw a broad passage, where great stars of mountain crystal were shining in the ceiling.
"Well, did I fool you?" the woman said with a smile, and pointed to the end of the mountain wall, and true enough, there a patch of sky and the towers and turrets of a town could be discerned. "There you have the world and your fortune, if you can catch it, of course!" she said and laughed.
"Yes, that is what I am going to try!"
"You are too insignificant and too weak for that, but I will help you, if you want it?"
Well, that he did not mind. She was so radiantly beautiful, and the world shone so enticingly in the distance.
"I shall give you treasure, greater than you can imagine," she continued and knocked thrice upon the mountain wall. It opened anew, and Elias and his companion entered a great hall, where heaps of treasure were gathered.
Elias was almost blinded when he looked around. The world's riches emperors all together probably could not gather anything like this. The floor was of purest gold; the walls made up of precious stones and pearls, and big diamonds were sparkling in the ceiling.
"What would you say about such a gift from me?" the woman said, and showed him a crown, upon which there were diamonds nearly the size of eggs. "For this you could almost buy yourself a kingdom. If there is anything else you would want to own in here, you can pick and chose freely, but first you must come to meet my six sisters and get their approval as well."
She brought him into another hall in the mountain, and it was as hideous in ugliness as the last one had been radiant in beauty and splendour. The walls and ceiling were covered with great poisonous, seeping fungi, revolting reptiles and big insects crawled on the floor, and in the middle of the floor, gathered around a dark stone table, there were six witches, so horribly ugly that Elias could not stand to look at them. Most horrible of all was that the beautiful woman who had lured him with her had grown as ugly as the others.
"You don't look very pleased to see us," said one of the witches and laughed, but the laughter sounded mostly like hoarse croaking. "Our beautiful sister, who has brought you here, probably wants to gift you with some of the pretty things you just saw. You will have that, and the right to leave us afterwards, but in return you have to leave that which you have held dear before here. Why don't you think about it tonight – the treasure chamber will be your guestroom while you stay here with us."
That night Elias sat in the blinding hall and fingered his worn purse – he could probably leave that without regrets when he got so much else in its stead. He put the purse in a crevice in the rock wall.
"Well, now I have given up that which I held dear," Elias said to the witches the next morning.
"Oh, maybe you have a little more to give," one of them said and grinned evilly at him.
"And what could that be?" Elias asked and tried to look as if he was not bothered.
"A little book, maybe," one of them croaked. "Once again, you have a whole night," they told him as he returned to the treasure chamber.
Even more splendid than before the treasure chamber shone in his eyes, and he walked back and forth worriedly over the shining gold tiles of the floor. Of course it would be a shame, he thought, if the small bible came into the power of the witches, but he would make up for that sin by building a grand church once he was back out in life. And thus he put the small bible next to the purse in the crevice, which had grown slightly bigger.
"Now I want to get out of here, because now I have nothing more left to give you," Elias told the witches, who strangely enough did not seem that ugly to him anymore.
"There is just a small promise that that you will have to leave here, and then you will be free," one of them objected. "You probably know yourself what that promise is."
That was of course the promise to never to forget to pray to God. Prayer he could not hide away in the same way as the other things, so he had to promise the witches never to seek God in prayer. If that promise were to be broken, all his wealth and riches would be turned to dust and ashes.
"Tomorrow you may leave us," they told him and smiled all friendly-like. Poor Elias was so far gone that he was starting to think the witches were really nice.
"Now there's just one more little trifle left, something you don't need anymore, and that you will have to give us. Your mother's blessings!"
And thus the last night came for Elias. A great golden chest, filled to the brim with jewellery and precious things, stood next to him, where he sat pondering whether or not he could somehow escape the last sacrifice without losing all his treasure.
"If I cannot make it I could always stay here among all this treasure," he thought.
And best he sat there it was as if huge, heavy tears leaked from the mountain wall, where the small bible and the purse were tucked away. They now shone stronger than everything else around Elias. He stared at the shimmering droplets that fell to the floor and started forming words. He leaned forward to make out the text, and lo! – the clear drops plainly spelled the urge:" Never forget to pray to God, my child."
Then the spell within him broke, and it was as if a blindfold had fallen from his eyes. Tears streamed down his cheeks.
"Thank you, beloved mother, for your help, and forgive me, merciful God!"
Elias took the hidden things back from the mountain wall, fell to his knees and asked God to help save him from the seven witches. When he looked around again, the treasure chamber had undergone a terrible change. The walls were again dull grey granite, and all the pearls and jewels lay as wilted leaves on the floor. But through the crack in the wall a shimmering ray of sunlight burst through, and with a terrible bang the mountain split in two. The seven witches threw themselves into the room, but Elias was already at the opening, and the horrible witches screeched, and reached for him in vain with their long, crooked arms.
 "God help me now!" he prayed, and in the same moment a snowy white horse stood before him. Fast as lightning he leapt up and then it carried off into the sunlight again.
"I did not grow so much richer from my stay with the witches in the mountain," he said, "but maybe I did grow wiser." Then he opened his old purse to count the coins. And that's when he noticed that the old beggar-woman's wilted leaves had turned into gold coins.
"I could never have believed that such a small gift to the poor could bring such a blessing with it."
He weighed the coins in his hand to convince himself that they were real. Yes, this gold was certainly different from that which the witches had tried to fool him to accept. Still, he thought now, his greatest wealth was that he had found peace with himself and his God again. And full of joy at having escaped the terrible witches he new flew forward – out into the world.
________________


The Wishes
(by Hedvig Indebetou, published in "Guldslottet 1899")


There once was a poor girl, Eva was her name, and she was herding goats in the mountain.
Often she would stand on the highest peaks and look out, as far as her eye could see, and wonder how it looked beyond the horizon.
"I would like to be a bird," she said, "and fly out in the wide world – that's where wealth and happiness are to be found."
Then it happened one day, while she was gazing out over the valley below, that she spotted a whole column of beautiful carriages and proud riders on the road that wound through it. It was the queen who was on a journey with her large and magnificent retinue. 
"Her I want to serve," the girl cried to herself, and now her decision was irrevocably made.
When she returned home by evening she told her master and mistress that she no longer wanted to stay with them, but wanted to go out into the world and seek her fortune. 
The master and mistress tried to dissuade her, but she did not care. So she packed up her few belongings in a small pack, said her farewells to people on the farm, and left on her way.
Eva had hardly made it out to the great road before she found herself before a pair of high iron gates that barred her way, and by one of them there was an old man acting gatekeeper. She was somewhat surprised, and carefully asked:
"Where does this road lead, dear father?"
"It leads out into the great, wide world," the old man answered.
"That is just where I mean to go," the young girl answered happily "so would you be so kind as to open the gate for me?"
"I would be glad to," said the old man "but for that you have to pay gate money".
That alarmed Eva, because she did not have any money.
"If you don't have any money, you will have to give me your long, fair hair," the old man said.
The girl was appalled, because that she did not want to lose, but her wish to get out into the world was so strong that she rather agreed to the condition than turned around. Then the old man cut her long tresses, and gave her a little bonnet in compensation.
After many tiring days' walking she came to land that was evermore beautiful and rich, and so one day she saw from a hill, how the capital city's golden turrets glinted far off in the distance. Close by the foot of the hill there was a wide river that blocked her way. A ferry lay by the shore, and on it sat an elderly ferryman.
"Would you be so kind as to take me across the river, dear father," she asked, "because I am going to the queen's city."
"I would be rather pleased to," answered the man, "but then you will have to pay ferry money."
"That I do not have," answered Eva, "but maybe I have something else you could consider instead."
"The roses in your cheeks," the rower answered.
Eva heaved a deep sigh – but she did not want to turn around now, when she had just glimpsed her goal in the distance. So she gathered her courage and stepped resolutely into the boat, and the old man quickly rowed her across.
Again Eva had a long way to go, further than it had seemed from the hill on the other side. But she pashed herself to her limits, and finally reached the city walls on that evening. An old soldier guarded its gate. She now asked him to be let inside.
"You will be," he answered harshly, "only if you pay toll."
Saddened Eva now answered, that she had already before had given away so much to pass through on her way, that she did not know of anything else she had to give.
"Then you will have to give me your nights' calm sleep," the old warrior answered.
And though Eva sighed more heavily than before, she answered that as long as nothing was demanded of her peace of mind, she was willing to give what was asked – only that she could not lose. Then the old warrior smiled and opened the gate to her and in addition showed her a good place to room in the city. Eva thanked him, and after a night's restless sleep she dressed in her best clothes to go up to the castle. By the great marble stares that led up to the castle gates there was an old butler in clothes with gold embroidery.
"What do you want," he asked haughtily.
"I want to seek service with the good queen," the girl said, "do you think that she will accept me? I want to serve her faithfully."
"Maybe so," the man answered in a milder voice, "I have heard that she is looking for more maids-in-waiting."
"I would be happy with the very humblest of positions," said Eva, "as long as I can serve her."
"But you must pay a fee to enter," the butler answered.
Then Eva burst into tears and explained that she had already given away everything of value that she had to reach her wishes' goal. The old butler laid his hand on Eva's head, and she then recognized that it was the same old man she'd met at the gate, the ferry, and the city walls. She humbly bent her head.
"You know that I have so little to give, but take what you want," she said slowly and trustingly.
"I want your confidence and your presumption! They are the only things I've wanted all this time, but if I had asked for them before, you would not have given them to me. But if you give them me now, then maybe you will get all those other things back sometime."
"Oh, you're more than free to take that – I don't want to keep that at all! And if you would some day return the other things to me, I would be eternally grateful. Now I only wish to serve the good mistress of this country."
Then the old man brought her before the queen and gave her good recommendations for the position. The queen took Eva in as her maid, who forgot about everything that she had given up in her joy at being allowed to stay in the castle.
Long she stayed in the queen's service, and because she always handled her tasks thoroughly and faithfully, she soon rose higher in rank as well as in the queen's confidence, until she was finally her most trusted handmaiden. 
So it happened once, that a successful knight in the queen's service arrived to the castle. The queen arranged a great feast, and after having given him several great rewards, she added that he, if he so wished, could chose one of his maids for his bride. The young knight thanked her and answered:
"Great is your gift, your Majesty, but the choice is one that seems impossible, with all these fair maids. But during these festivities one has caught my attention, who seems to be the first in mildness and loyalty."
And he turned to Eva and bowed deeply to her.
The queen as well as the guests were surprised at his choice, since she could not measure in beauty with the others. The maid had pale cheeks and red-rimmed eyes, and only wore a simple bonnet where the others had rich cascades of hair adorned with costly ornaments.
"It makes me glad that you see deeper than just the surface," the queen said. "Your choice is really the most faithful and devoted of them all. It shall cause me great sadness to lose her, but at the same time great joy to see her reach the happiness she so well deserves."
With overwhelming joy Eva gave the knight her hand and asked humbly:
"Do you too require a gift of me?" Because she had learned, that for everything she had achieved she would have to give something up in exchange.
"Yes, " the night answered with a radiant smile, "I ask a greater gift of you than the others – I want your rich, warm heart!"
Then the girl smiled too, and lo! Then roses bloomed on her cheeks once more, and her eyes regained their former sparkle, and when the little bonnet was taken off her head, a great cascade of soft curls sprang down around her neck, so that she proved to be more beautiful than all the others.
When the queen had celebrated their wedding with pomp and ceremony, the knight took her home to his castle – and they might yet be living there still. 


________________


Vaste and the dwarves
 (by Jenny Hallin published in "Folkskolans barntidning" 1896) 


In the deep forest there lived a lumberjack. He had a son and a daughter, who were the light of his life. The girl, little Viri, was content with her father. Without complaints she cooked gruel for breakfast, potatoes for lunch and porridge for supper. For her company she had a cat and two goats, and with this she was satisfied. But Vaste, her brother, he was not satisfied. He wanted to go out into the world, and his longing pulled him there.
His father sighed and his sister sighed and even Vaste himself sighed at the moment of parting, but away he had to go. Viri sent some food along, but Vaste thought that was completely unnecessary. If he just got on his way, he claimed, he would not lack for food. 
He went out into the forest, which proved to be much larger than expected, and it was still as dense when it became time for supper. Now you can believe that the meal tasted good. Finally he lay down on a patch of moss and fell asleep. He was soon awakened by rain pouring down on him, and he didn't have any cover. In the darkness, when he felt the cold, driving rain on him, he noticed nothing of all the things of which he had dreamed. He only saw his father's grey head and Viri's golden locks, and then tears of longing for them streamed down his round cheeks. Finally he fell asleep again, and woke first when the sun stood high in the sky.
The birds were singing, the flowers smelled lovely, and the moss was greener than ever. Now Vaste could not understand how he could have been so unhappy during the night. Hastily he continued his journey and thought of how pretty Viri would be in the golden crown, that he was going to get her.
Hi, ho! There the forest thinned. A beautiful, small and even plain was spread before him. Soon he had walked across it and stood by the foot of the mountain that rose on the other side of the plain. Now he just had to get over it. The rocks were sharp and Vaste's feet bare. He tried a few steps, and then he slipped. A couple of stones rolled down, and Vaste almost fell with them. 
Then there was a crack so loud that it made Vaste's heart jump. A shrill ringing came from inside the mountain, and a door opened. A funny little man appeared bowing in the doorway all of a sudden.
"Does sir wish to enter?" he asked politely.
Vaste gaped in surprise. Was he being called sir? He looked at the patches on his jacket-sleeve and at his naked feet.
"Is sir looking for anyone in particular?" the gatekeeper asked once again.
"No," said Vaste, "I am just going out into the world.
"Then sir has come to the right place. Here young people come to get help before they continue onwards out in the world."
Vaste was curious.
"So who lives here then?"
"Oh, we are many, and all of us helpful and kindly. Måns Egoism, Max Miser, Truls Envy and Bob Spender, and many, many other famous men. They are at your service, all of them, young sir," the little one answered.
Vaste did not know what to say. The gatekeeper opened the door tantalizingly wide. Then Vaste could see how the mountain hall in there glimmered and shone. To think that he could see all of this up close! He asked if someone so insignificant as himself could be allowed to enter.
"Oh, yes! We want to be able to be of help to everyone. We would dearly like to help such a big, beautiful youth who looks so strong and brave," the gatekeeper said.
"Well, doesn't that sound like something?" Vaste thought.
He smoothed his uncombed hair, bent down and the gatekeeper let him enter the mountain. He had come to the kingdom of the dwarves. It was fair in here, but cold. Vaste's bare toes were freezing, and missed the warm sunshine. From the gold and silver stars in the ceiling the damp dripped in heavy drops down on his hot forehead. Far away in the mountain he could see a splendid throne, on which there was a black, ugly dwarf who proudly wore a crown of reddest gold and held a sceptre adorned with the brightest of jewels. 
Vaste immediately understood that this was the king. Around the surprised boy a chorus of happy voices sounded. There were whisperings and mumblings, and here and there the sound of joyful laughter. But Vaste, he looked omly at the king.
"Do you like the king?" asked a grey-bearded dwarf in tailcoat and starched collar.
"What's his name?" Vaste asked excitedly.
"His name is Self, the nine hundred and ninety-ninth, and his kingdom has no boarders, and his power no limits.
Vaste just admired. A king! A mighty king! Now that really was something!
The dwarf brought him to the throne. Around the throne there were dwarves with high red hats and shining orders. Vaste was ashamed for his patched sweater, and almost afraid to be run out of the fancy company. But – what now? Everyone bowed to him? Was it possible that they thought him to be the emperor's son?
"I am Vaste from the forest cabin!" he cried, to sort out the possible misunderstanding. 
Then the fine gentlemen fell on their knees, and king Self bowed deeply in his throne.
"I know that, and only wonder, how we shall reward the services you can render us. Silver and gold, as much as you see, is yours if you would be one of my finest councillors."
Vaste was happy. Silver and gold – gold and silver! So Vaste became the servant of king Self. "One of my finest", the king had said. That did not keep him from having to go in his tattered coat and sweep stairs and scrub copper kettles. He asked for food, but in answer he was told that he had not been promised such, only silver and gold. When he said that he was to be a councillor, the dwarves laughed mockingly at him.
"Who would give up their place for you, you pauper? Why, just wait for it, don't you?"
Vaste cried bitter tears and longed for home. Nobody stopped him from taking silver and gold, but what was he to do with it?
One day he asked a dwarf, who was kinder than the others, why he had been lured there.
"To have you at hand if something should happen. Then someone of Christian blood would be needed," the dwarf answered.
A few years went by, and Vaste was no longer the red-cheeked boy, but a pale, emaciated creature. He longed to get away, but could not find the door in the mountain. One day as he was grinding the heavy mountain-mill, there was a great commotion in the kingdom. Vaste heard wild shouts and great confusion. 
"The mountain is falling! The mountain is falling!" he heard several times. 
The kind dwarf came running.
"Be careful – be careful! They want to sacrifice you!" he cried, out of breath.
Vaste was scared for a moment – but only a moment. He was tried of everything – it did not matter anymore. All the lords came running with the king in the lead, and after them uncountable numbers. At once Vaste was thrown out of the enchanted door. He rubbed his eyes. The sun was shining, the birds were singing, the flowers smelled lovely. On the side of the mountain sat an old man, singing a psalm praising God.
"So, they threw you out," he said. "They could not stand my song, because they believe that king Self's kingdom will crumble from it. But you see," he smiled, "that when the king sacrifices someone, then they get their freedom."
Now Vaste understood. He had been in the kingdom of selfishness, and become free again when he was sacrificed. Glad, he hurried towards his home.
Outside of the cabin Viri sat with a wreath of flowers around her head, much more beautiful than she could have been in the golden crown that Vaste had thought of getting her. 
________________